[Music]
so our planet is about four and a half
billion years old give or take and it
has a history of doing shadowy things
such as creating land masses and then
making them disappear around 1 billion
years ago I wasn't around then a
mysterious supercontinent was formed and
it swallowed and flipped the mainland
inside out and that could happen again
quite soon in geological time the
historical period when the land
connected to become the Rodinia
supercontinent and the time frame it
split are a bit foggy geologists believe
that roughly every 600 million years we
are met with the same fate our
continents connect to form a huge
landmass our oceans connect to form a
super ocean and then they split the
first supercontinent ever was nuna it
appeared about two billion years ago and
broke apart roughly 1 billion years
later then after some more million years
rodinia roughly translated as birthgiver
appeared it collected most of the
Earth's landmasses and then split around
750 million years ago
now this is our mysterious
supercontinent so from what you
understand this dance between continents
happens at a snail's pace even the
longest living animals on earth that can
live up to 400 years like the Greenland
shark won't be able to experience this
reorganization would you like to see any
of the super continents if you had such
a chance though let me know in the
comments
there isn't much information about the
position where Rodinia formed but
geologists are constantly finding new
clues on its original location around
the globe as the time went on Rodinia
began to split but that happened in
stages the breakup was triggered by a
super plume huge rising Jets of hot
molten rock and the Earth's mantle began
expanding that caused enormous
Canha corruptions that were later found
in every continent after the initial
split another sea appeared 200 million
years later it became the famous Lapidus
super ocean and it stuck around until
400 million years ago it formed in the
southern hemisphere of our globe around
three ancient continents there was
Lorenza Avalonia and Baal tikka but
history was once again repeating itself
so the ocean vanished and the lands
merged again to form a new great
supercontinent called panettone ax now
Rodinia stood out for a ton of reasons
one of them was because the landmass was
barren it couldn't produce vegetation
and it was overall lifeless no trees or
plants were around it appeared during a
time when life on dry land didn't even
exist that's when the ozone layer comes
into play the ozone shield started
forming a little after the road Indian
continent appeared sunlight hit the
oxygen molecules and broke them into
smaller individual atoms interestingly
the ozone layer
unlike oxygen and oxygen gas consists of
three oxygen atoms and it appears as oh
three since its appearance it began
absorbing higher levels of radiation
from the Sun and that allowed life on
land to flourish before the ozone layer
the only living things could be found in
the ocean they were blue-green algae but
after the protective shield form small
creatures appear life grew and evolution
thrived when Rodinia started welcoming
new tiny beings it also started to
separate and new oceans were born the
seafloor started spreading and that
resulted in two warmer oceanic
lithosphere
now those lithosphere 'z had low density
and when they warmed up
they couldn't dive as deep as the cooler
ones did so here's where it gets
interesting a study led by Shang Shang
Lee from Curtin University in Australia
found some unique patterns about the
supercontinent cycle and the earth's
lithosphere they found patterns in the
mantle that matched perfectly to a 600
million-year-old cycle according to one
of the papers Lee and his team believe
that the earth has two alternating
cycles the first one runs for 600
million years and it brings all the land
masses together the second cycle lasts
for double the time around 1.2 billion
years and a new super ocean is born each
of these events has to shifting methods
introversion and extroversion no I'm not
talking about psychology
these are geologic terms so let's start
with the first one
introversion now imagine a giant
landmass being surrounded by a super
ocean when the continent starts to
separate in small rifts form water
begins to slowly flow through them until
a smaller inner ocean is formed that's
when subduction zones come into play
these are the boundaries that mark the
collision between tectonic plates now
dropping all the sciency stuff here's
what I mean
when tectonic plates made at a
subduction zone one bends and then
slides under the other then they both
slowly curve down into the mantle wow
that's some subduction going on all
right now tectonic plates can either be
both Oceanic and continental or they can
be one of each type for example the
oceanic crust is denser than the
continental so at a subduction zone the
oceanic crust will be the one to sink
below the lighter continental crust
sometimes there could be a collision
between two continents so the plates
crash together without a subduction zone
forming that's exactly what happened
when India slammed into Asia millions of
years ago and the Himalayan chains
formed now that we got the gist of what
subduction zones are let's get back into
the juicy methods the earth uses to make
things disappear during the introversion
method the oceanic crust dives back into
the earth hot mantle the inner ocean
sinks back into the Earth's interior and
then the continents reconnect again so a
new supercontinent gets formed with the
same old water that existed before but
extroversion
quite different that method creates a
new super ocean and a fresh landmass let
me show you at first
the supercontinent starts to separate so
water begins to flow through it and an
internal ocean is formed but the
subduction zone doesn't appear there it
shows up in the super ocean around the
separating landmass then the earth
swallows the super ocean while also
pulling apart the rifting continental
crust which begins to sink at the bottom
so the landmass literally flips
inside-out the coastlines collide again
to form new centers and the middle of
the old continent becomes the new coast
Lee and his research team created a
simulation to study that pattern and
they found that in the last hundred
million years both extraversion and
introversion changed if the pattern
continued we'd be do a new extraversion
method in a few hundred million years
yet we are due to another introversion
let's go back to the nuna supercontinent
that I told you about at the beginning
when that happened it occurred through
introversion both noona and Rodinia had
the same super ocean surrounding them
that ocean was called the Mira boy when
the oceanic crust started to subduct
rodinia began separating and the sea
disappeared interestingly that super
ocean reappeared as the Panthalassa in
the formation of Pangaea after Pangaea
broke apart Panthalassa appeared which
means the whole ocean survived in the
pacific ocean crust
since the patterns have changed it's
estimated that the next supercontinent
will be created through introversion
again the indian Southern Oceans and
possibly the Atlantic will disappear the
Pacific will expand again and a super
ocean will be born this future
hypothetical supercontinent is given the
name of Amasia
they got the title from the idea that
Asia will merge with North America the
theory relied on the fact that the
Pacific crust is subducting under
Eurasia and North America
another clue is that the western part of
the Pacific plate is subducting under
the Philippine Sea which created the
Mariana Trench the deepest part of the
Pacific Ocean but this is just a theory
some models tried to follow the
movements of our continents to see if an
extra version or introversion is
possible Lee and his colleagues
researched the molecular variation
patterns in ancient rocks and found that
introversion is most likely to happen
everything comes down to plate tectonics
the problem is nobody knows what causes
the beginning of a subduction there is
even disagreement among geologists on
when the earth plate started moving
around some of them say it started a few
million years after the earth was formed
while others claim it started 2 to 3
billion years later but at least now we
were able to understand how the earth
can flip its continents inside out and
that it won't probably happen when a new
landmass forms right now the tectonic
plates are moving north which includes
Australia and Africa it is estimated
that in a few hundred million years I
won't be around that all the landmass is
excluding Antarctica we'll connect in
the North Pole to form the Amasia
that makes everyone wonder how we will
evolve what the climate of the
supercontinent will be like and how life
will adapt but I'll leave that to the
scientists or my fortune teller hey if
you learn something new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life